DOC make HGBT more visible in user guide (#26778)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/ensemble.rst

.. _ensemble:

===========================================================================

> Ensembles: Gradient boosting, random forests, bagging, voting, stacking...

Author: So far, we have only this, so I can just remove the trailing "..."

> Ensembles: Gradient boosting, random forests, bagging, voting, stacking...

Author: Done

===========================================================================

.. currentmodule:: sklearn.ensemble

**Ensemble methods** combine the predictions of several
base estimators built with a given learning algorithm in order to improve
generalizability / robustness over a single estimator.

Two very famous examples of ensemble methods are `gradient-boosted trees
<gradient_boosting>`_ and `random forests <forest>`_.

More generally, ensemble models can be applied to any base learner beyond
trees, in averaging methods such as :ref:`Bagging methods <bagging>`,
`model stacking <stacking>`_, or `Voting <voting_classifier>`_, or in
boosting, as :ref:`AdaBoost <adaboost>`.

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 1

.. _gradient_boosting:

Gradient-boosted trees
======================

`Gradient Tree Boosting <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gradient_boosting>`_
or Gradient Boosted Decision Trees (GBDT) is a generalization

> of boosting to arbitrary differentiable loss functions, see the seminal work of

Author: I don't think that being that precise is useful: either the reader is very technical and he/she knows this, or the reader is not very technical, and this is too technical for them.

[Friedman2001]_. GBDT is an excellent model for both regression and
classification, in particular for tabular data.

.. topic:: :class:`GradientBoostingClassifier` vs :class:`HistGradientBoostingClassifier`

  Scikit-learn provides two implementations of gradient-boosted trees:
  :class:`HistGradientBoostingClassifier` vs
  :class:`GradientBoostingClassifier` for classification, and the

>   corresponding classes for regression. The former can be **order of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  corresponding classes for regression. The former can be **orders of
```

  magnitude faster** than the latter when the number of samples is
  larger than tens of thousands of samples.

  The Hist.. version also have built-in support for missing values, which

>   avoids the need for an imputer.

Author: Implemented

  :class:`GradientBoostingClassifier` and
  :class:`GradientBoostingRegressor`, might be preferred for small sample
  sizes since binning may lead to split points that are too approximate
  in this setting.

.. _histogram_based_gradient_boosting:

Histogram-Based Gradient Boosting
----------------------------------

Scikit-learn 0.21 introduced two new implementations of

> gradient boosting trees, namely :class:`HistGradientBoostingClassifier`

Reviewer: As we spelled out GBDT above, I also favor „grad. boostED dtrees“.

gradient boosting trees, namely :class:`HistGradientBoostingClassifier`
and :class:`HistGradientBoostingRegressor`, inspired by
`LightGBM <https://github.com/Microsoft/LightGBM>`__ (See [LightGBM]_).

These histogram-based estimators can be **orders of magnitude faster**
than :class:`GradientBoostingClassifier` and
:class:`GradientBoostingRegressor` when the number of samples is larger
than tens of thousands of samples.

They also have built-in support for missing values, which avoids the need
for an imputer.

These fast estimators first bin the input samples ``X`` into
integer-valued bins (typically 256 bins) which tremendously reduces the
number of splitting points to consider, and allows the algorithm to
leverage integer-based data structures (histograms) instead of relying on
sorted continuous values when building the trees. The API of these
estimators is slightly different, and some of the features from
:class:`GradientBoostingClassifier` and :class:`GradientBoostingRegressor`

> are not yet supported, for instance some loss functions.

Reviewer: On the other side, the old GBDT does not have some new features like native categorical support.

  >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_hastie_10_2

  >>> X, y = make_hastie_10_2(random_state=0)
  >>> X_train, X_test = X[:2000], X[2000:]
  >>> y_train, y_test = y[:2000], y[2000:]

  >>> clf = HistGradientBoostingClassifier(max_iter=100).fit(X_train, y_train)
  >>> clf.score(X_test, y_test)
  0.8965

Available losses for regression are 'squared_error',
'absolute_error', which is less sensitive to outliers, and
'poisson', which is well suited to model counts and frequencies. For
classification, 'log_loss' is the only option. For binary classification it uses the
binary log loss, also known as binomial deviance or binary cross-entropy. For
`n_classes >= 3`, it uses the multi-class log loss function, with multinomial deviance
and categorical cross-entropy as alternative names. The appropriate loss version is
selected based on :term:`y` passed to :term:`fit`.

The size of the trees can be controlled through the ``max_leaf_nodes``,
``max_depth``, and ``min_samples_leaf`` parameters.

The number of bins used to bin the data is controlled with the ``max_bins``
parameter. Using less bins acts as a form of regularization. It is

> generally recommended to use as many bins as possible, which is the default.

Author: Right, but this has nothing to do with the PR, and I cannot myself vouch for this.

generally recommended to use as many bins as possible (256), which is the default.

> The ``l2_regularization`` parameter is a regularizer on the loss function and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``l2_regularization`` parameter is a regularizer on the loss function and therefore on the leaf values and
```

Note that **early-stopping is enabled by default if the number of samples is
larger than 10,000**. The early-stopping behaviour is controlled via the
``early_stopping``, ``scoring``, ``validation_fraction``,
``n_iter_no_change``, and ``tol`` parameters. It is possible to early-stop
using an arbitrary :term:`scorer`, or just the training or validation loss.
Note that for technical reasons, using a scorer is significantly slower than
using the loss. By default, early-stopping is performed if there are at least
10,000 samples in the training set, using the validation loss.

Missing values support
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:class:`HistGradientBoostingClassifier` and
:class:`HistGradientBoostingRegressor` have built-in support for missing
values (NaNs).

During training, the tree grower learns at each split point whether samples
with missing values should go to the left or right child, based on the
potential gain. When predicting, samples with missing values are assigned to

> the left or right child consequently::

Reviewer 2: > it is stating the obvious ("during prediction time the learnt split rule is used", well yeah I'd hope so)

Yes, that's what I meant when I wrote this. It probably sounds better in French. If this is too obvious, we can remove this last sentence.

> if no missing values were seen for this particular split during fit then the missing values are consistently assign to the left node

Side note: we actually use the node with the most samples, not "always left"

> the left or right child consequently::

Reviewer 3: I think we could reword it to be easier to parse or skip it?

> the left or right child consequently::

Author: Sounds like great work for another PR

  >>> from sklearn.ensemble import HistGradientBoostingClassifier
  >>> import numpy as np

  >>> X = np.array([0, 1, 2, np.nan]).reshape(-1, 1)
  >>> y = [0, 0, 1, 1]

  >>> gbdt = HistGradientBoostingClassifier(min_samples_leaf=1).fit(X, y)
  >>> gbdt.predict(X)
  array([0, 0, 1, 1])

> When the missingness pattern is predictive, the splits can be done on
> whether the feature value is missing or not::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the missingness pattern is predictive, the splits can be performed on
whether the feature value is missing or not::
```
I feel like explicitly mentioning that this is in addition to the normal splitting rules that are evaluated would help. But I can't come up with a compact sentence/edit that does that.

  >>> X = np.array([0, np.nan, 1, 2, np.nan]).reshape(-1, 1)
  >>> y = [0, 1, 0, 0, 1]
  >>> gbdt = HistGradientBoostingClassifier(min_samples_leaf=1,
  ...                                       max_depth=2,
  ...                                       learning_rate=1,
  ...                                       max_iter=1).fit(X, y)
  >>> gbdt.predict(X)
  array([0, 1, 0, 0, 1])

If no missing values were encountered for a given feature during training,
then samples with missing values are mapped to whichever child has the most
samples.

.. _sw_hgbdt:

Sample weight support
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:class:`HistGradientBoostingClassifier` and

> :class:`HistGradientBoostingRegressor` sample support weights during

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:class:`HistGradientBoostingRegressor` support sample weights during
```
"sampling support weights" sounds like a new technique waiting to be invented :D

:term:`fit`.

> The following toy example demonstrates how the model ignores the samples with
> zero sample weights:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following toy example demonstrates that samples with a sample weight of zero are ignored:
```

    >>> X = [[1, 0],
    ...      [1, 0],
    ...      [1, 0],
    ...      [0, 1]]
    >>> y = [0, 0, 1, 0]
    >>> # ignore the first 2 training samples by setting their weight to 0
    >>> sample_weight = [0, 0, 1, 1]
    >>> gb = HistGradientBoostingClassifier(min_samples_leaf=1)
    >>> gb.fit(X, y, sample_weight=sample_weight)
    HistGradientBoostingClassifier(...)
    >>> gb.predict([[1, 0]])
    array([1])
    >>> gb.predict_proba([[1, 0]])[0, 1]
    0.99...

As you can see, the `[1, 0]` is comfortably classified as `1` since the first
two samples are ignored due to their sample weights.

Implementation detail: taking sample weights into account amounts to

> multiplying the gradients (and the hessians) by the sample weights. Note that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
multiplying the gradients (and the hessians) by the sample weights.
```
It feels like "Implementation detail" already puts us in "Note something ..." mode, so having another "Note" inside a note is like a segue inside a segue

the binning stage (specifically the quantiles computation) does not take the
weights into account.

.. _categorical_support_gbdt:

> Categorical Features Support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Categorical Feature Support
```
Not sure, is it featureS or feature?

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

depending on the featureS comment above at least one ^ needs removing (or two)

:class:`HistGradientBoostingRegressor` have native support for categorical
features: they can consider splits on non-ordered, categorical data.

For datasets with categorical features, using the native categorical support
is often better than relying on one-hot encoding
(:class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.OneHotEncoder`), because one-hot encoding
requires more tree depth to achieve equivalent splits. It is also usually
better to rely on the native categorical support rather than to treat
categorical features as continuous (ordinal), which happens for ordinal-encoded
categorical data, since categories are nominal quantities where order does not
matter.

To enable categorical support, a boolean mask can be passed to the
`categorical_features` parameter, indicating which feature is categorical. In
the following, the first feature will be treated as categorical and the
second feature as numerical::

  >>> gbdt = HistGradientBoostingClassifier(categorical_features=[True, False])

Equivalently, one can pass a list of integers indicating the indices of the
categorical features::

  >>> gbdt = HistGradientBoostingClassifier(categorical_features=[0])

> The cardinality of each categorical feature should be less than the `max_bins`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cardinality of each categorical feature must be less than the `max_bins`
```

parameter, and each categorical feature is expected to be encoded in
`[0, max_bins - 1]`. To that end, it might be useful to pre-process the data
with an :class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.OrdinalEncoder` as done in

> :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_ensemble_plot_gradient_boosting_categorical.py`.

Reviewer 3: I thought we merged a PR that makes it so that all the rare categories above 255 are merged into one (the last) bin?

If there are missing values during training, the missing values will be
treated as a proper category. If there are no missing values during training,
then at prediction time, missing values are mapped to the child node that has
the most samples (just like for continuous features). When predicting,
categories that were not seen during fit time will be treated as missing
values.

**Split finding with categorical features**: The canonical way of considering
categorical splits in a tree is to consider
all of the :math:`2^{K - 1} - 1` partitions, where :math:`K` is the number of
categories. This can quickly become prohibitive when :math:`K` is large.
Fortunately, since gradient boosting trees are always regression trees (even
for classification problems), there exist a faster strategy that can yield
equivalent splits. First, the categories of a feature are sorted according to
the variance of the target, for each category `k`. Once the categories are

> sorted, one can consider *continuous partitions*, i.e. treat the categories

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
sorted, one can treat the categories
```
do we need to introduce the term "continuous partitions"? Especially if we then straight away go to the simpler/less jargon-y way of explaining what it is.

as if they were ordered continuous values (see Fisher [Fisher1958]_ for a
formal proof). As a result, only :math:`K - 1` splits need to be considered
instead of :math:`2^{K - 1} - 1`. The initial sorting is a
:math:`\mathcal{O}(K \log(K))` operation, leading to a total complexity of
:math:`\mathcal{O}(K \log(K) + K)`, instead of :math:`\mathcal{O}(2^K)`.

.. topic:: Examples:

  * :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_ensemble_plot_gradient_boosting_categorical.py`

.. _monotonic_cst_gbdt:

Monotonic Constraints

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

monotonic decrease constraint, respectively::

  >>> from sklearn.ensemble import HistGradientBoostingRegressor

  ... # monotonic increase, monotonic decrease, and no constraint on the 3 features
  >>> gbdt = HistGradientBoostingRegressor(monotonic_cst=[1, -1, 0])

In a binary classification context, imposing a monotonic increase (decrease) constraint means that higher values of the feature are supposed
to have a positive (negative) effect on the probability of samples
to belong to the positive class.

Nevertheless, monotonic constraints only marginally constrain feature effects on the output.
For instance, monotonic increase and decrease constraints cannot be used to enforce the
following modelling constraint:

    .. math::
        x_1 \leq x_1' \implies F(x_1, x_2) \leq F(x_1', x_2')

Also, monotonic constraints are not supported for multiclass classification.

.. note::
    Since categories are unordered quantities, it is not possible to enforce
    monotonic constraints on categorical features.

.. topic:: Examples:

  * :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_ensemble_plot_monotonic_constraints.py`

.. _interaction_cst_hgbt:

Interaction constraints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> A priori, the histogram gradient boosting trees are allowed to use any feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A priori, the histogram gradient boosted trees are allowed to use any feature
```

For instance, with 3 features in total, ``interaction_cst=[{0}, {1}, {2}]``
forbids all interactions.
The constraints ``[{0, 1}, {1, 2}]`` specifies two groups of possibly
interacting features. Features 0 and 1 may interact with each other, as well
as features 1 and 2. But note that features 0 and 2 are forbidden to interact.
The following depicts a tree and the possible splits of the tree:

.. code-block:: none

      1      <- Both constraint groups could be applied from now on
     / \
    1   2    <- Left split still fulfills both constraint groups.
   / \ / \      Right split at feature 2 has only group {1, 2} from now on.

LightGBM uses the same logic for overlapping groups.

Note that features not listed in ``interaction_cst`` are automatically
assigned an interaction group for themselves. With again 3 features, this
means that ``[{0}]`` is equivalent to ``[{0}, {1, 2}]``.

.. topic:: References

  .. [Mayer2022] M. Mayer, S.C. Bourassa, M. Hoesli, and D.F. Scognamiglio.
     2022. :doi:`Machine Learning Applications to Land and Structure Valuation
     <10.3390/jrfm15050193>`.
     Journal of Risk and Financial Management 15, no. 5: 193

> Low-level parallelism

Reviewer 3: I'm not a fan of "low-level". Low level makes me think of C and Assembler. Things that are complicated to use and better left to experts.

What about "Built-in parallelism"?

Author: This parallelism is lower-level than the one that we typically expose. It is indeed in C.

I would rather not change this, in particular since it is not related to the changes that I propose.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:class:`HistGradientBoostingClassifier` and

> :class:`HistGradientBoostingRegressor` have implementations that use OpenMP

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:class:`HistGradientBoostingRegressor` use OpenMP
```

Less words and, I think, clearer. This makes it clear that they use OpenMP, always. "have implementations" makes me wonder if there are several implementations, some that use it, some that don't, etc.

- gradient and hessians computations are parallelized over samples
- predicting is parallelized over samples

.. _Why_it's_faster:

Why it's faster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The bottleneck of a gradient boosting procedure is building the decision
trees. Building a traditional decision tree (as in the other GBDTs
:class:`GradientBoostingClassifier` and :class:`GradientBoostingRegressor`)
requires sorting the samples at each node (for
each feature). Sorting is needed so that the potential gain of a split point
can be computed efficiently. Splitting a single node has thus a complexity
of :math:`\mathcal{O}(n_\text{features} \times n \log(n))` where :math:`n`
is the number of samples at the node.

:class:`HistGradientBoostingClassifier` and
:class:`HistGradientBoostingRegressor`, in contrast, do not require sorting the
feature values and instead use a data-structure called a histogram, where the
samples are implicitly ordered. Building a histogram has a
:math:`\mathcal{O}(n)` complexity, so the node splitting procedure has a
:math:`\mathcal{O}(n_\text{features} \times n)` complexity, much smaller
than the previous one. In addition, instead of considering :math:`n` split

> points, we here consider only ``max_bins`` split points, which is much

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
points, we consider only ``max_bins`` split points, which is much
```

or if you like using "here": "points, here we consider ..."

> points, we consider only ``max_bins`` split points, which is much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
points, we consider only ``max_bins`` split points, which might be much
```

  .. [R2007] G. Ridgeway (2006). `Generalized Boosted Models: A guide to the gbm
     package <https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/gbm/vignettes/gbm.pdf>`_

.. _forest:

> Random forests and other randomized trees ensembles

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Random forests and other randomized tree ensembles
```
treeS seems weird

set of classifiers is created by introducing randomness in the classifier
construction.  The prediction of the ensemble is given as the averaged
prediction of the individual classifiers.

As other classifiers, forest classifiers have to be fitted with two
arrays: a sparse or dense array X of shape ``(n_samples, n_features)``
holding the training samples, and an array Y of shape ``(n_samples,)``
holding the target values (class labels) for the training samples::

    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    >>> X = [[0, 0], [1, 1]]
    >>> Y = [0, 1]
    >>> clf = RandomForestClassifier(n_estimators=10)
    >>> clf = clf.fit(X, Y)

Like :ref:`decision trees <tree>`, forests of trees also extend to
:ref:`multi-output problems <tree_multioutput>`  (if Y is an array
of shape ``(n_samples, n_outputs)``).

Random Forests
--------------

In random forests (see :class:`RandomForestClassifier` and
:class:`RandomForestRegressor` classes), each tree in the ensemble is built
from a sample drawn with replacement (i.e., a bootstrap sample) from the
training set.

Furthermore, when splitting each node during the construction of a tree, the

> best split is found either from all input features or a random subset of size

Reviewer: One random subset per tree or per split?

``max_features``. (See the :ref:`parameter tuning guidelines
<random_forest_parameters>` for more details).

> The purpose of these two sources of randomness is to decrease the variance of

Reviewer: For my own understanding: Doesn‘t the randomness increase rather than decrease the variance of the trees?

Reviewer 3: I think it does increase the variance of each tree, but because the trees are less correlated as a result of this, when you then average them you get a forest with a lower variance (than any of the individual trees). Basically the magic of taking the average and how the uncertainty on the average scales with sqrt(N).

Author: All this is unrelated to this PR.

I absolutely welcome improving the docs, but that's for another PR. Can we focus on the changes introduce by this PR?

Reviewer: > All this is unrelated to this PR.

Absolutely. I explicitly said „for my understanding“.

> the forest estimator. Indeed, individual decision trees typically exhibit high

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the forest estimator. Individual decision trees typically exhibit high
```
I don't think we need the indeed, and I think "indeed" is something to use when you are agreeing with something that has already been said. Maybe "In fact" is better but I would just remove the indeed and not add anything.

   build shallow trees (that underfit individually) which are faster to fit
   and predict.

-  Sequential boosting: In HGBT, the decision trees are built sequentially,
   where each tree is trained to correct the errors made by the previous ones.
   This allows them to iteratively improve the model's performance using
   relatively few trees. In contrast, random forests use a majority vote to
   predict the outcome, which can require a larger number of trees to achieve
   the same level of accuracy.

-  Efficient binning: HGBT uses an efficient binning algorithm that can handle
   large datasets with a high number of features. The binning algorithm can
   pre-process the data to speed up the subsequent tree construction (see
   :ref:`Why it's faster <Why_it's_faster>`). In contrast, the scikit-learn
   implementation of random forests does not use binning and relies on exact
   splitting, which can be computationally expensive.

Overall, the computational cost of HGBT versus RF depends on the specific
characteristics of the dataset and the modeling task. It's a good idea
to try both models and compare their performance and computational efficiency

> on your specific problem to determine which model is the best fit.

Reviewer: Maybe link to user guide for model comparison and train test split?

> characteristics of the dataset and the modeling task. It's always a good idea

Reviewer 3: nit.
```suggestion
characteristics of the dataset and the modeling task. It's a good idea
```
